VOLUME I

CHAPTER I
In Which the Reader Is Introduced to a Man of Humanity


Late in the afternoon of a chilly day in February, two gentlemen were
sitting alone over their wine, in a well-furnished dining parlor, in
the town of P——, in Kentucky. There were no servants present, and the
gentlemen, with chairs closely approaching, seemed to be discussing
some subject with great earnestness.

For convenience sake, we have said, hitherto, two _gentlemen_. One of
the parties, however, when critically examined, did not seem, strictly
speaking, to come under the species. He was a short, thick-set man,
with coarse, commonplace features, and that swaggering air of
pretension which marks a low man who is trying to elbow his way upward
in the world. He was much over-dressed, in a gaudy vest of many colors,
a blue neckerchief, bedropped gayly with yellow spots, and arranged
with a flaunting tie, quite in keeping with the general air of the man.
His hands, large and coarse, were plentifully bedecked with rings; and
he wore a heavy gold watch-chain, with a bundle of seals of portentous
size, and a great variety of colors, attached to it,—which, in the
ardor of conversation, he was in the habit of flourishing and jingling
with evident satisfaction. His conversation was in free and easy
defiance of Murray’s Grammar,[1] and was garnished at convenient
intervals with various profane expressions, which not even the desire
to be graphic in our account shall induce us to transcribe.

 [1] English Grammar (1795), by Lindley Murray (1745-1826), the most
 authoritative American grammarian of his day.


His companion, Mr. Shelby, had the appearance of a gentleman; and the
arrangements of the house, and the general air of the housekeeping,
indicated easy, and even opulent circumstances. As we before stated,
the two were in the midst of an earnest conversation.

“That is the way I should arrange the matter,” said Mr. Shelby.

“I can’t make trade that way—I positively can’t, Mr. Shelby,” said the
other, holding up a glass of wine between his eye and the light.

“Why, the fact is, Haley, Tom is an uncommon fellow; he is certainly
worth that sum anywhere,—steady, honest, capable, manages my whole farm
like a clock.”

“You mean honest, as niggers go,” said Haley, helping himself to a
glass of brandy.

“No; I mean, really, Tom is a good, steady, sensible, pious fellow. He
got religion at a camp-meeting, four years ago; and I believe he really
_did_ get it. I’ve trusted him, since then, with everything I
have,—money, house, horses,—and let him come and go round the country;
and I always found him true and square in everything.”

“Some folks don’t believe there is pious niggers Shelby,” said Haley,
with a candid flourish of his hand, “but _I do_. I had a fellow, now,
in this yer last lot I took to Orleans—‘t was as good as a meetin, now,
really, to hear that critter pray; and he was quite gentle and quiet
like. He fetched me a good sum, too, for I bought him cheap of a man
that was ’bliged to sell out; so I realized six hundred on him. Yes, I
consider religion a valeyable thing in a nigger, when it’s the genuine
article, and no mistake.”

“Well, Tom’s got the real article, if ever a fellow had,” rejoined the
other. “Why, last fall, I let him go to Cincinnati alone, to do
business for me, and bring home five hundred dollars. ‘Tom,’ says I to
him, ‘I trust you, because I think you’re a Christian—I know you
wouldn’t cheat.’ Tom comes back, sure enough; I knew he would. Some low
fellows, they say, said to him—Tom, why don’t you make tracks for
Canada?’ ’Ah, master trusted me, and I couldn’t,’—they told me about
it. I am sorry to part with Tom, I must say. You ought to let him cover
the whole balance of the debt; and you would, Haley, if you had any
conscience.”

“Well, I’ve got just as much conscience as any man in business can
afford to keep,—just a little, you know, to swear by, as ’t were,” said
the trader, jocularly; “and, then, I’m ready to do anything in reason
to ’blige friends; but this yer, you see, is a leetle too hard on a
fellow—a leetle too hard.” The trader sighed contemplatively, and
poured out some more brandy.

“Well, then, Haley, how will you trade?” said Mr. Shelby, after an
uneasy interval of silence.

“Well, haven’t you a boy or gal that you could throw in with Tom?”

“Hum!—none that I could well spare; to tell the truth, it’s only hard
necessity makes me willing to sell at all. I don’t like parting with
any of my hands, that’s a fact.”

Here the door opened, and a small quadroon boy, between four and five
years of age, entered the room. There was something in his appearance
remarkably beautiful and engaging. His black hair, fine as floss silk,
hung in glossy curls about his round, dimpled face, while a pair of
large dark eyes, full of fire and softness, looked out from beneath the
rich, long lashes, as he peered curiously into the apartment. A gay
robe of scarlet and yellow plaid, carefully made and neatly fitted, set
off to advantage the dark and rich style of his beauty; and a certain
comic air of assurance, blended with bashfulness, showed that he had
been not unused to being petted and noticed by his master.

“Hulloa, Jim Crow!” said Mr. Shelby, whistling, and snapping a bunch of
raisins towards him, “pick that up, now!”

The child scampered, with all his little strength, after the prize,
while his master laughed.

“Come here, Jim Crow,” said he. The child came up, and the master
patted the curly head, and chucked him under the chin.

“Now, Jim, show this gentleman how you can dance and sing.” The boy
commenced one of those wild, grotesque songs common among the negroes,
in a rich, clear voice, accompanying his singing with many comic
evolutions of the hands, feet, and whole body, all in perfect time to
the music.

“Bravo!” said Haley, throwing him a quarter of an orange.

“Now, Jim, walk like old Uncle Cudjoe, when he has the rheumatism,”
said his master.

Instantly the flexible limbs of the child assumed the appearance of
deformity and distortion, as, with his back humped up, and his master’s
stick in his hand, he hobbled about the room, his childish face drawn
into a doleful pucker, and spitting from right to left, in imitation of
an old man.

Both gentlemen laughed uproariously.

“Now, Jim,” said his master, “show us how old Elder Robbins leads the
psalm.” The boy drew his chubby face down to a formidable length, and
commenced toning a psalm tune through his nose, with imperturbable
gravity.

“Hurrah! bravo! what a young ’un!” said Haley; “that chap’s a case,
I’ll promise. Tell you what,” said he, suddenly clapping his hand on
Mr. Shelby’s shoulder, “fling in that chap, and I’ll settle the
business—I will. Come, now, if that ain’t doing the thing up about the
rightest!”

At this moment, the door was pushed gently open, and a young quadroon
woman, apparently about twenty-five, entered the room.

There needed only a glance from the child to her, to identify her as
its mother. There was the same rich, full, dark eye, with its long
lashes; the same ripples of silky black hair. The brown of her
complexion gave way on the cheek to a perceptible flush, which deepened
as she saw the gaze of the strange man fixed upon her in bold and
undisguised admiration. Her dress was of the neatest possible fit, and
set off to advantage her finely moulded shape;—a delicately formed hand
and a trim foot and ankle were items of appearance that did not escape
the quick eye of the trader, well used to run up at a glance the points
of a fine female article.

“Well, Eliza?” said her master, as she stopped and looked hesitatingly
at him.

“I was looking for Harry, please, sir;” and the boy bounded toward her,
showing his spoils, which he had gathered in the skirt of his robe.

“Well, take him away then,” said Mr. Shelby; and hastily she withdrew,
carrying the child on her arm.

“By Jupiter,” said the trader, turning to him in admiration, “there’s
an article, now! You might make your fortune on that ar gal in Orleans,
any day. I’ve seen over a thousand, in my day, paid down for gals not a
bit handsomer.”

“I don’t want to make my fortune on her,” said Mr. Shelby, dryly; and,
seeking to turn the conversation, he uncorked a bottle of fresh wine,
and asked his companion’s opinion of it.

“Capital, sir,—first chop!” said the trader; then turning, and slapping
his hand familiarly on Shelby’s shoulder, he added—

“Come, how will you trade about the gal?—what shall I say for
her—what’ll you take?”

“Mr. Haley, she is not to be sold,” said Shelby. “My wife would not
part with her for her weight in gold.”

“Ay, ay! women always say such things, cause they ha’nt no sort of
calculation. Just show ’em how many watches, feathers, and trinkets,
one’s weight in gold would buy, and that alters the case, _I_ reckon.”

“I tell you, Haley, this must not be spoken of; I say no, and I mean
no,” said Shelby, decidedly.

“Well, you’ll let me have the boy, though,” said the trader; “you must
own I’ve come down pretty handsomely for him.”

“What on earth can you want with the child?” said Shelby.

“Why, I’ve got a friend that’s going into this yer branch of the
business—wants to buy up handsome boys to raise for the market. Fancy
articles entirely—sell for waiters, and so on, to rich ’uns, that can
pay for handsome ’uns. It sets off one of yer great places—a real
handsome boy to open door, wait, and tend. They fetch a good sum; and
this little devil is such a comical, musical concern, he’s just the
article!’

“I would rather not sell him,” said Mr. Shelby, thoughtfully; “the fact
is, sir, I’m a humane man, and I hate to take the boy from his mother,
sir.”

“O, you do?—La! yes—something of that ar natur. I understand,
perfectly. It is mighty onpleasant getting on with women, sometimes, I
al’ays hates these yer screechin,’ screamin’ times. They are _mighty_
onpleasant; but, as I manages business, I generally avoids ’em, sir.
Now, what if you get the girl off for a day, or a week, or so; then the
thing’s done quietly,—all over before she comes home. Your wife might
get her some ear-rings, or a new gown, or some such truck, to make up
with her.”

“I’m afraid not.”

“Lor bless ye, yes! These critters ain’t like white folks, you know;
they gets over things, only manage right. Now, they say,” said Haley,
assuming a candid and confidential air, “that this kind o’ trade is
hardening to the feelings; but I never found it so. Fact is, I never
could do things up the way some fellers manage the business. I’ve seen
’em as would pull a woman’s child out of her arms, and set him up to
sell, and she screechin’ like mad all the time;—very bad policy—damages
the article—makes ’em quite unfit for service sometimes. I knew a real
handsome gal once, in Orleans, as was entirely ruined by this sort o’
handling. The fellow that was trading for her didn’t want her baby; and
she was one of your real high sort, when her blood was up. I tell you,
she squeezed up her child in her arms, and talked, and went on real
awful. It kinder makes my blood run cold to think of ’t; and when they
carried off the child, and locked her up, she jest went ravin’ mad, and
died in a week. Clear waste, sir, of a thousand dollars, just for want
of management,—there’s where ’t is. It’s always best to do the humane
thing, sir; that’s been _my_ experience.” And the trader leaned back in
his chair, and folded his arm, with an air of virtuous decision,
apparently considering himself a second Wilberforce.

The subject appeared to interest the gentleman deeply; for while Mr.
Shelby was thoughtfully peeling an orange, Haley broke out afresh, with
becoming diffidence, but as if actually driven by the force of truth to
say a few words more.

“It don’t look well, now, for a feller to be praisin’ himself; but I
say it jest because it’s the truth. I believe I’m reckoned to bring in
about the finest droves of niggers that is brought in,—at least, I’ve
been told so; if I have once, I reckon I have a hundred times,—all in
good case,—fat and likely, and I lose as few as any man in the
business. And I lays it all to my management, sir; and humanity, sir, I
may say, is the great pillar of _my_ management.”

Mr. Shelby did not know what to say, and so he said, “Indeed!”

“Now, I’ve been laughed at for my notions, sir, and I’ve been talked
to. They an’t pop’lar, and they an’t common; but I stuck to ’em, sir;
I’ve stuck to ’em, and realized well on ’em; yes, sir, they have paid
their passage, I may say,” and the trader laughed at his joke.

There was something so piquant and original in these elucidations of
humanity, that Mr. Shelby could not help laughing in company. Perhaps
you laugh too, dear reader; but you know humanity comes out in a
variety of strange forms now-a-days, and there is no end to the odd
things that humane people will say and do.

Mr. Shelby’s laugh encouraged the trader to proceed.

“It’s strange, now, but I never could beat this into people’s heads.
Now, there was Tom Loker, my old partner, down in Natchez; he was a
clever fellow, Tom was, only the very devil with niggers,—on principle
’t was, you see, for a better hearted feller never broke bread; ’t was
his _system_, sir. I used to talk to Tom. ‘Why, Tom,’ I used to say,
‘when your gals takes on and cry, what’s the use o’ crackin on’ ’em
over the head, and knockin’ on ’em round? It’s ridiculous,’ says I,
‘and don’t do no sort o’ good. Why, I don’t see no harm in their
cryin’,’ says I; ’it’s natur,’ says I, ‘and if natur can’t blow off one
way, it will another. Besides, Tom,’ says I, ‘it jest spiles your gals;
they get sickly, and down in the mouth; and sometimes they gets
ugly,—particular yallow gals do,—and it’s the devil and all gettin’ on
’em broke in. Now,’ says I, ‘why can’t you kinder coax ’em up, and
speak ’em fair? Depend on it, Tom, a little humanity, thrown in along,
goes a heap further than all your jawin’ and crackin’; and it pays
better,’ says I, ‘depend on ’t.’ But Tom couldn’t get the hang on ’t;
and he spiled so many for me, that I had to break off with him, though
he was a good-hearted fellow, and as fair a business hand as is goin’.”
